amid those fears of escalation US
President Joe Biden is set to visit
Israel on Wednesday in a show of
solidarity Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin made that announcement after
overnight talks with the Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu blinkin said
that they agreed to Begin work on some
kind of plan that could see Aid allowed
into
Gaza the United States and Israel have
agreed to develop a plan that will
enable humanitarian aid from donor
Nations and multilateral organizations
to reach civilians in Gaza and them
alone including the possibility of
creating areas to help keep civilians
out of Harm's Way It Is critical that
Aid begin flowing into Gaza as soon as
possible we share Israel's concern that
Hamas May seize or destroy Aid entering
Gaza or otherwise preventing it from
reaching the people who need it if Hamas
in any way blocks humanitarian
assistance from reaching civilians
including by seizing the aid itself
we'll be the first to condemn it and we
will work to prevent it from happening
again well let's now speak to our White
House correspondent kimbery hit kimbery
we know that Biden is about to be on
route to Israel if he isn't already talk
us through his agenda there and what he
hopes to achieve on this
trip yeah the US president said to
depart early evening washing time so
he's not yet left he he should be
leaving about six hours or later he's
rarely on time um what we do know is
that he is going to be meeting with the
Israeli Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and
there are three goals that he has for
that meeting uh the first is to outline
humanitarian assistance to essentially
uh make sure that there's a framework
for that to make sure that there's food
water medicine getting in and making
sure that there's a safe passage for
those that are uh trapped to get out but
that this doesn't allow or benefit humas
at all so uh that is one of the top
priorities of this visit the other is
Military Support the United States
standing shoulder-to-shoulder with
Israel and making no uh mistake about
that wants to make sure it's getting the
support that it needs and working with
Congress to do so so finding some
clarity on that as well as getting an
update on the pace of military
operations and as well uh finding an
update on the uh hostages and how those
uh not only Americans but also foreign
Nationals can be reunited with their
fames so that meeting will take place
and then concurrently or rather right
after that meeting uh the US president
will be traveling to Jordan where he
will be meeting with uh King Abdullah he
will also be meeting with President Cece
and Mahmud abas of the Palestinian
Authority kimy as you and I are talking
we're watching Smoke Rise Above Gaza
City right now as the civilian death
toll in Gaza continues to mount have you
noticed any kind of a change in tone
from the United
States uh well there certainly has been
a change in tone in terms of the
priority of the humanitarian situation
uh the US president on About a Week Ago
insisted that the United States in
Israel were complying with international
law and making it a priority that they
comply with international law making
this sort of moral distinction between
itself and Hamas except that there
didn't seem to be any sort of moral
distinction given the fact that Israel
was denying electricity food water and
the US was supporting Israel in that and
didn't seem to be making any sort of
effort to hold Israel to account but it
seems in the last 24 hours there seems
to be a shift towards making the
humanitarian effort a priority and
ensuring that civilians get what they
need and so that would certainly be a
market shift compared to many days
earlier our White House correspondent
kimbery halet there for us thank you
very much kimy and just to point out to
our viewers we are watching further air
strikes right now live on your screen
well let's now bring bring in Andrew
basovich he's a US military historian he
also co-founded the Quincy Institute for
responsible statecraft he joins us now
from Walpole in Massachusetts Mr
basovich I want to start by asking you
to reflect a little on the US response
over the last 10 days both in terms of
military mobilization and rhetoric how
closely aligned now are the US and
Israeli National Security
practices not as closely aligned as they
were 24 hours after this War Began uh I
think that the shock uh felt by Israelis
was matched by the shock of many
Americans uh and so the rhetoric we were
hearing both from the Biden
Administration uh and from commentators
basically mirrored the rhetoric from uh
the Israelis that that Hamas was going
to be destroyed uh and there appeared to
be very little concern
about the negative consequences for uh
for these the civilian residents of Gaza
it seems to me that that now has
substantially changed and the
humanitarian issue is moving quickly to
the Forefront even as that happens
though I believe Israel national
security adviser has said that he
believes the US will get involved if the
war spreads if we for instance the
escalation on the Lebanese border
Iranian involvement what's your
assessment now of the Biden when it
comes to the Middle
East I I my my impression is that
despite what that uh uh spokesman said
uh that Israel does not want uh the
United States to become militarily
involved uh doing so would be a massive
departure from the Israeli strategic
tradition uh which insists that Israel
defends itself uh in all in all
circumstances uh beyond that I seriously
doubt that Mr Biden wants to become
directly involved uh in the war that is
to say putting American soldiers at risk
possibly sustaining us casualties uh he
is uh well in that our country is now
well into uh an election campaign uh
recent American wars have not gone well
uh have not benefited uh incumbents I'm
referring to Iraq and Afghanistan
primarily uh and therefore from a
political calculus I would say that the
last thing the Biden Administration
wants is to get the US in another
shooting War I want to ask you a little
bit about your writing because in the
past you've said that the inhabitants of
Gaza and the occupied West Bank could
only annoy Israel and not do it serious
harm do you think that's changed and and
has harm already been done even if it's
been only to the the perception of
Israel as being
invulnerable yeah if I wrote that it was
wrong because the Hamas attack has
clearly indicated uh capabilities to do
damage to Israel that are far beyond
what I think most observers uh expected
now that doesn't mean that Hamas has the
capability of overrunning Israel or of
really winning uh a war uh with with the
IDF uh but but they have demonstrated uh
capabilities and determination uh that
have
uh done tremendous harm uh to to Israel
and and one suspects that that Hamas has
the capability to do more of the same
again I want to ask you a little bit
about the rhetoric that you mentioned
there in the immediate aftermath of the
attacks in Israel and at the start of
this war because those the rhetoric that
was used then has had consequences four
years ago you said and I'm sorry to
quote you back to yourself it's not been
permissible to have an honest
conversation about the US Israeli
relationship and about Israeli policies
to insist on having that honest
conversation is to invite punishment do
you feel that way in the US
today oh I think there's no doubt about
it uh and and the Hamas uh terror attack
uh has has made it that much more
difficult for Americans to take any kind
of a balanced view of of the of the uh
uh Israeli Palestinian conflict to do so
uh is to be painted an aaser to be
painted an apologist for Hamas and
therefore what I think is necessary
which is to uh to take seriously the
history of this conflict and how it has
evolved uh that is off the table uh and
and that is one of the reasons why it's
going to be that much more difficult to
come to a reasoned piece once this war
is finally over you speak about a
reasoned piece do you think what we're
seeing unfold now potentially could
provide an opportunity to make different
choices going forward perhaps even
reinvigorate some kind of an engagement
with a new peace
process well I would like to answer your
question in the affirmative I I would
like to say that this can pave the way
for some kind of arrangement that would
enable able Palestinians and Israelis to
live together in peace I think the
likelihood of that happening is close to
nil now that said there are moments in
history uh when War brings about
substantial and indeed positive
political change in a sense I think we
saw an example of that in the wake of
the 73 War which led to peace between
Israel and Egypt so in in theory that's
possible as a practical matter uh I
don't see the leadership on either side
of this uh conflict that is going to
make that kind of a deal possible Andrew
basovich there a US military historian
and a co-founder of the Quincy Institute
for responsible statecraft really great
to get your thoughts here on Al jazer Mr
basovich thank you for joining
us thank you